### When Eric Weinstein and Peter Thiel get together...

...you're sure to hear grandiose claims about the stagnation of science and no
real substance to back it up. Or at least that's what you'll get if you watch
Eric's recently released <a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nM9f0W2KD5s">
first podcast episode</a> (I would recommend against).

Potshots aside though, I was pretty flabbergasted by their claim that since the
early 1970s, science as a whole has more or less frozen in time, and that
academic progress has ground to what amounts to a complete halt. Perhaps I am
blinded by young naivet√©, but from my perspective several fields (especially
biology, which they seem to have it out for in particular) have done nothing but
accelerate the pace of their development over the past ten years. From the human
genome project to CRISPr, it's hard to deny that advances in our ability to
probe and modify our own biology is advancing at an exponential rate even faster
than Moore's law.  (And this comes just as Moore's law itself is slowing down
for the first time since the 70s, the point of time at which Peter and Eric
claim the great demise of science began).

So why the pessimism on their part? Well they really do harp on the idea that
progress in biology, (after molecular biology was "founded by physicists") never
progressed at a pace comparable to that of our understanding of "the atom". They
make sure to never pin down exactly what would constitute a "fast" pace of
biological discovery, but they make sure to explicitly posit that biology full
of "not [as] talented people" as physics.

If you spend any non-zero amount of time at the interface of math, physics, and
biology, this is a pattern that you'll see come up over and over again.
Physicists (or in Thiel's case, simply self-proclaimed "intellectuals"),
always think that with their superior creativity/intelligence/mathematical
ability, they can swoop into biology, arguably the most populated area of modern
research, and swiftly lay down some kind of simple foundational principles that
have managed to elude biologists for the past century.

Invariably, some fraction of these physicists actually do start doing biological
research, and quickly find themselves drowning in a sea of protein names,
apparently useless acronyms for genes, and systems that require much more
specification and have many fewer "universal" properties than they would have
anticipated. Most run away before getting very far, but many make non-trivial
contributions (after all, its true that typical biologists tend to prefer having
other people do their math/modeling for them, so that they have more time to do
experiments). That said, only a very few become "card-carrying" biologists, able
to hold their own in a conversation with the mythical "real" biologist, whose
encyclopaedic knowledge of historical experiments, networks of genes, and
post-translational modifications related to their system of interest *literally*
dwarfs even the literature itself, due to years of hearing folkloric,
unpublished results through the grapevine.

What separates these "card-carrying" biologists from the physicists that run
away? Is it as Eric and Peter would probably suggest, that they have simply
become focused on less interesting questions? Have they simply lost their love
or ability to do mathematics?

I think what separates the wheat from the chaff is the realization that the
fundamental principles of biology have long been well known, just as they have
been for physics. Namely:

<ol>
<li>
Physics still works inside living cells. The
laws of physics still lie at the heart of how cells, tissues and organisms work.
Supposing God himself had gifted you with a list of every relevant molecule and
interation in a biological system, you won't meet many biologists who will claim
that an appropriate computer simulation wouldn't be able to reproduce
experimental results as well as can be done in fundamental physics research.
</li>
<li>
Evolution by natural selection has, broadly speaking, been in charge of the
development of all modern forms of life. Therefore, all control systems within
living organisms must have developed through random mutation. As a consequence,
there are an absolutely massive number of leftover and/or partially-functioning
systems in any given organism. You can't search for a protein by knowing what
the optimal way for the cell to solve a problem would be (although biology does
optimize some things pretty well) because natural selection need not find the
best solution, it just finds *some* solution, then "tries" to make it better
over time.
</li>
</ol>

What the physicists-turned-biologists that I respect will all universally admit
is that biology seems to follow what I like to call the "principle of most
action": if you think you know the answer to how something is being done by a
cell, you are probably missing 10 more key players, several dozen more backup
systems, and a the part that you think is most important may even be just
vestigial.

Is this status quo (that most biological "models" are doomed to fail) just a
side effect of biologists not being smart enough to make good models? NO!
It's built right into the thing that's being studied. Organisms that spent
billions of years stochastically searching DNA sequence space for genomes that
would keep them around for evolutionary time are just going to be complex. The
fact that biologists tend to be skeptical of the physicist's approach of
building "simple" models to gain understanding in a "bottom-up" approach is well
founded, because they have decades of experience as a field finding that the
simplest explanation just wasn't the one that stood up to more experiments.

If you've made it this far somehow, you might be wondering why I'm writing this?
I guess it upsets me that so many of Eric and Peter's valid criticisms of
academia (the fact that tenure is a pyramid scheme, the perverse incentive
structures, etc) are mixed with these grandiose ideas about how much smarter
they must be than people in these other fields, since those fields are "moving
so slow".

Hopefully someday I can come back and rewrite this into a guide: "how to be a
good biologist for <span style="text-decoration: line-through;">dummies</span>
physicists".  But for now I guess it will remain a rant about the pitfalls of
pontificating about a field you know nothing about.

